 Nux vomica  
 (poison-nut)  
 * Is the greatest of polychrests, because the bulk of its symptoms correspond in similarity 
with those of the commonest and most frequent of diseases.  
 * It is frequently the first remedy, indicated after much dosing, establishing a sort of 
equilibrium of forces and counteracting chronic effects.  
 Nux is pre-eminently the remedy for many of the conditions incident to modern life.  
 The typical Nux patient is rather thin, spare, quick, active, nervous, and irritable.  
 He does a good deal of mental work; has mental strains and leads a sedentary life, found in 
prolonged office work, overstudy, and close application to business, with its cares and 
anxieties.  
 This indoor life and mental strain seeks stimulants, coffee, wine, possibly in excess; or, 
again, he hopes to quiet his excitement, by indulging in the sedative effects of tobacco, if not 
really a victim, to the seductive drugs, like opium, etc.  
 These things are associated with other indulgences; at table, he takes preferably rich and 
stimulating food; wine and women play their part to make him forget the close application of 
the day.  
 Late hours are a consequence; a thick head, dyspepsia, and irritable temper are the next day's 
inheritance.  
 Now he takes some cathartic, liver pills, or mineral water, and soon gets into the habit of 
taking these things, which still further complicate matters.  
 Since these frailties are more yielded to by men than women.  
 Nux is pre-eminently a male remedy.  
 These conditions, produce an irritable, nervous system, hypersensitive and over-
impressionable, which Nux will do much to soothe and calm.  
 Especially adapted to digestive disturbances, portal congestion, and hypochondrical states 
depending thereon.  
 Convulsions, with consciousness; worse, touch, moving.  
 Nux patients are easily chilled, avoid open air, etc.  
 Nux always seems to be out of tune; inharmonious spasmodic action.  
 Mind  
 - Very irritable: sensitive to all impressions.  
 - Ugly, malicious.  
 - Cannot bear noises, odors, light, etc.  
 - Does not want to be touched.  
 - Time passes too slowly.  
 - Even the least ailment affects her greatly.  
 - Disposed to reproach others.  
 - Sullen, fault-finding.  
 Head  
 - Headache in occiput or over eyes, with vertigo; brain feels turning in a circle.  
 - Oversensitiveness.  
 - Vertigo, with momentary loss of consciousness.  
 - Intoxicated feeling; worse, morning, mental exertion, tobacco, alcohol, coffee, open air.  
 - Pressing pain on vertex, as if a nail driven in.  
 - Vertigo in morning and after dinner.  
 - Scalp sensitive.  
 - Frontal headache, with desire to press the head against something.  
 - Congestive headache, associated with haemorrhoids.  
 - Headache in the sunshine. [Glon.; Nat. carb.] Feels distended and sore within, after a 
debauch.  
 Eyes  
 - Photophobia; much worse in morning.  
 - Smarting dry sensation in inner canthi.  
 - Infra-orbital neuralgia, with watering of eyes.  
 - Optic nerve atrophy, from habitual use of intoxicants.  
 - Paresis of ocular muscles; worse, tobacco and stimulants.  
 - Orbital twitching radiating towards the occiput, Optic neuritis.  
 Ears  
 - Itching in ear through Eustachian tube.  
 - Auditory canal dry and sensitive.  
 - Otalgia; worse in bed.  
 - Hyperaesthesia of auditory nerves; loud sounds are painful, and anger him.  
 Nose  
 - Stuffed up, at night especially.  
 - Stuffy colds, snuffles, after exposure to dry, cold atmosphere; worse, in warm room.  
 - Odors tend to produce fainting.  
 - Coryza : fluent in daytime; stuffed up at night and outdoors; or alternates between nostrils.  
 - Bleeding in morning. [Bry.]  
 - Acrid discharge, but with stuffed up feeling.  
 Mouth  
 - Jaws, contracted.  
 - Small aphthous ulcers, with bloody saliva.  
 - First half of tongue clean; posterior covered with deep fur; white, yellow, cracked edges.  
 - Teeth ache; worse, cold things.  
 - Gums swollen, white, and bleeding.  
 Throat  
 - Rough, scraped feeling. Tickling after waking in morning.  
 - Sensation of roughness, tightness, and tension.  
 - Pharynx constricted.  
 - Uvula swollen.  
 - Stitches into ear.  
 Stomach  
 - Sour taste, and nausea in the morning, after eating. Weight and pain in stomach; worse, 
eating, some time after.  
 - Flatulence and pyrosis.  
 - Sour, bitter eructations.  
 - Nausea and vomiting, with much retching.  
 - Ravenous hunger, especially about a day before an attack of dyspepsia.  
 - Region of stomach very sensitive to pressure. [Bry.; Ars.] Epigastrium bloated, with 
pressure s of a stone, several hours after eating.  
 - Desire for stimulants.  
 - Loves fats and tolerates them well. (Puls. opposite.)  
 - Dyspepsia from drinking strong coffee.  
 - Difficult belching of gas.  
 - Wants to vomit, but cannot.  
 Abdomen  
 - Bruised soreness of abdominal walls. [Apis.; Sulph.] Flatulent distension, with spasmodic 
colic.  
 - Colic from uncovering.  
 - Liver engorged, with stitches and soreness.  
 - Colic, with upward pressure, causing short breath, and desire for stool.  
 - Weakness of abdominal ring region.  
 - Strangulated hernia. [Op.]  
 - Forcing in lower abdomen towards genitals.  
 - Umbilical hernia of infants.  
 Stool  
 - Constipation, with frequent ineffectual urging, incomplete and unsatisfactory; feeling as if 
part remained unexpelled.  
 - Constriction of rectum.  
 - Irregular, peristaltic action; hence frequent ineffectual desire, or passing but small quantities 
at each attempt. Absence of all desire for defecation is a contra-indication.  
 - Alternate constipation and diarrhoea-after abuse of purgatives.  
 - Urging to stool felt throughout abdomen.  
 - Itching, blind haemorrhoids, with ineffectual urging to stool; very painful; fater drastic 
drugs.  
 - Diarrhoea after a debauch; worse, morning.  
 - Frequent small evacuations.  
 - Scanty stool, with much urging.  
 - Dysentery; stools relieve pains for a time. Constant uneasiness in rectum.  
 - Diarrhoea, with jaundice. [Dig.]  
 Urine  
 - Irritable bladder; from spasmodic sphincter.  
 - Frequent calls; little and often.  
 - Haematuria. [Ipec.; Tereb.]  
 - Ineffectual urging, spasmodic and strangury.  
 - Renal colic extending to genitals, with dribbling urine.  
 - While urinating, itching in urethra and pain in neck of bladder.  
 Male  
 - Easily excited desire.  
 - Emissions from high living.  
 - Bad effects of sexual excesses.  
 - Constrictive pain in testicles.  
 - Orchitis. [Hama.; Puls.]  
 - Spermatorrhoea, with dreams, backache, burning in spine, weakness and irritability.  
 Female  
 - Menses too early, lasts too long;  always irregular, blood black [Cycl.; Lach.; Puls.] with 
faint spells.  
 - Prolapsus uteri. Dysmenorrhoea, with pain in sacrum, and constant urging to stool.  
 - Inefficient labor-pains; extend to rectum, with desire for stool and frequent urination. [Lil.]  
 - Desire too strong.  
 - Metrorrhagia, with sensation as if bowels wanted to move.  
 Respiratory  
 - Catarrhal hoarseness, with scraping in throat.  
 - Spasmodic constriction.  
 - Asthma, with fullness in stomach, morning or after eating.  
 - Cough, with sensation as if something were torn loose in chest.  
 - Shallow respiration. Oppressed breathing.  
 - Tight, dry hacking cough; at times with bloody expectoration.  
 - Cough brings on bursting headache and bruised pain in epigastric region.  
 Back  
 - Backache in lumbar region.  
 - Burning in spine; worse, 3 to 4 a.m.    
 - Cervico-brachial neuralgia; worse, touch.  
 - Must situp in order to turn in bed.  
 - Bruised pain below scapulae.  
 - Sitting is painful.  
 Extremities  
 - Arms and hands go to sleep.  
 - Paresis of arms, with shocks.  
 - Legs numb; feel paralyzed; cramps in calves and soles.  
 - Partial paralysis, from overexertion or getting soaked. [Rhus.]  
 - Cracking in knee-joints during motion.  
 - Drags his feet when walking.  
 - Sensation of sudden loss of power of arms and legs in the morning.  
 Sleep  
 - Cannot sleep after 3 a.m.   until towards morning; awakes feeling wretchedly.  
 - Drowsy after meals, and in early evening.  
 - Dreams full of bustle and hurry.  
 - Better after a short sleep, unless aroused.  
 Skin  
 - Body burning hot, especially face; yet cannot move or uncover without feeling chilly.  
 - Urticaria, with gastric derangement.  
 - Acne; skin red and blotchy.  
 Fever  
 - Cold stage predominates.  
 - Paroxysms anticipate in morning.  
 - Excessive rigor, with blueness of finger-nails.  
 - Aching in limbs and back, and gastric symptoms.  
 - Chilly; must be covered in every stage of fever.  
 - Perspiration sour; only one side of body.  
 - Chilliness on being uncovered, yet he does not allow being covered.  
 - Dry heat of the body.  
 Modalities  
 - Worse, morning, mental exertion, after eating, touch, spices, stimulants, narcotics, dry 
weather, cold.  
 - Better, from a nap, if allowed to finish it; in evening, while at rest, in damp, wet weather 
[Caust.], strong pressure.  
 Relationship  
 - Nux seeds contain copper, notice the cramp-causing proclivites of both.  
 - Complementary; Sulphur; Sepia.  
 - Inimical : Zinc.  
 - Compare : Strychnia.  
 - Compare : Kali carb.; Hydr.; Bry.; Lyc.; Graph.  
 - Antidotes : Coff.; Ignat.; Cocc.  
 Dose  
 - First to thirtieth potency and higher.  
 - Nut is said to act best given in the evening.  
